National 5 Physics – Full Glossary (Units 1–3 with Super-Headings + Subtopics)
Unit 1 – Dynamics & Space
Vectors and Scalars
Scalar: Quantity with magnitude only.
Vector: Quantity with Magnitude and direction.
Bearing: 3-digit direction from North.
Resultant Vector: Final vector after adding vectors.
Velocity-time graphs
Displacement: Area under velocity-time graph.
Acceleration: Gradient of velocity-time graph.
Instantaneous Speed: Speed at a moment.
Acceleration
Acceleration: Change in velocity per second
Deceleration: Negative acceleration.
Acceleration due to Gravity: 9.8 m/s².
Newton's Laws
Newton’s 1st Law: Object stays at rest/moves uniformly unless unbalanced force acts.
Newton’s 2nd Law: Unbalanced force produces acceleration directly proportional to the force applied.
Newton’s 3rd Law: Every action force has an equal but opposite reaction force
Balanced Forces: Equal opposite forces.
Unbalanced Forces: Unequal opposite forces.
Projectile Motion
Projectile: Object moving under gravity.
Trajectory: Path of projectile.
Range: Horizontal distance.
Projectile Motion: Constant horizontal velocity + vertical acceleration.
Time of Flight: Time in air.
Satellite: Projectile in freefall with sufficient horizontal velocity to keep “missing” the earth.
Space Exploration
Celestial Body: Natural object in sky.
Planet: Object orbiting a star.
Dwarf Planet: Planet-like object not clearing orbit.
Exoplanet: Planet outside solar system orbiting another star
Moon: Natural satellite.
Asteroid: Orbits sun.
Star: Hot gas sphere.
Sun: Star at centre of solar system.
Solar System: Star with planets.
Galaxy: Collection of stars & gas.
Universe: All galaxies and space.
Geostationary Satellite: 24h orbit above equator – 36000 km.
Gravity Turn: Tilt minimising gravity losses.
Orbital Period: Time for orbit.
Orbital Radius: Distance from centre of orbit.
Gravity Assist: Using gravity to accelerate/decelerate
Docking: Joining spacecraft.
Re-entry: Entering atmosphere.
Vacuum: No particles.
Cosmology
Light Year: Distance light travels in 1 year.
Age of Universe: ~13.8 billion years.
Big Bang Theory: Universe expanding from hot dense point.
CMBR: Radiation left over from the big bang
Continuous Spectrum: Full ROYGBIV spectrum.
Line Spectra: Unique element lines.
Line Absorption Spectrum: Continuous with black lines.
Line Emission Spectrum: Bright lines in dark.
Telescope: Collects light
Space-based Telescope: Avoids light pollution
Radio Telescope: Detects radio waves.
Big Bang Evidence: abundance of hydrogen and helium

Unit 2 – Electricity & Properties of Matter
Current, voltage and resistance
Electrical Current: Charge per second.
Direct Current: One direction.
Alternating Current: Flow of charge (electrons) changes direction at regular intervals.
Electric Field: Force field around charge.
Voltage: Energy provided to each coulomb of charge.
Resistance: Opposition to current.
Ohm’s Law: Voltage across resistor is directly proportional to current through it.
Ohmic Conductor: Constant Resistance (gradient = resistance)
Non-Ohmic Conductor: Changing Resistance
Series Circuit: One path.
Parallel Circuit: Multiple paths.
Electrical Power
Electrical Power: Energy used per second.
Fuse: Melts with high current.
Diode: One-way current.
LED: Light emitting diode.
Transistor: Electronic switch.
NPN Transistor: Switches at 0.7V.
MOSFET: Switches at 2.0V.
Relay Switch: Controls high voltage.
Capacitor: Stores charge.
Thermistor: Temperature-dependent resistor.
LDR: Light-dependent resistor.
Solar Cell: Light to electricity.
Microphone: Sound to electrical.
Loudspeaker: Electrical to sound.
Specific Heat Capacity
Specific Heat Capacity: Energy required to change temperature of 1kg by 1°C.
Heat: Total kinetic energy.
Temperature: Average kinetic energy.
Specific Latent Heat
Specific Latent Heat: Energy required to change state of 1kg of substance
SLH Fusion: Solid → liquid.
SLH Vaporisation: Liquid → gas.
Fusion: Melting.
Vaporisation: Evaporation.
Condensing: Gas → liquid.
Freezing: Liquid → solid.
Pressure, Kinetic Theory and Gas Laws
Pressure: Force applied per unit area.
Absolute Zero: −273°C (zero pressure/no particle motion)
Kinetic Model: Random particle motion.
Boyle’s Law: Pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to Volume of the gas.
Charles’ Law: Volume of a gas is directly proportional to the temperature of the gas.
Gay-Lussac’s Law: Pressure of a gas is directly proportional to the temperature of the gas.
Unit 3 – Waves & Radiation
Wave properties
Longitudinal Wave: oscillations are parallel to direction of energy transfer.
Transverse Wave: oscillations are perpendicular to direction of energy transfer.
Frequency: number of waves produced per second.
Period: Time taken to produce 1 wave
Crest: Top point.
Trough: Bottom point.
Amplitude: Height from axis to peak/trough
Wavelength: Crest to crest.
Wave Speed: f×λ.
Diffraction: Bending around obstacles.
Refraction of light
Refraction: change in wave speed of light when passing between media
Normal: Perpendicular line to surface
Angle of Incidence: Incident ray ↔ normal.
Angle of Refraction: Refracted ray ↔ normal.
Nuclear Radiation
Atom: Neutral particle.
Proton: Positive nucleus particle.
Neutron: Neutral nucleus particle.
Electron: Negative orbiting particle.
Alpha Particle: Helium nucleus.
Beta Particle: Fast moving electron.
Gamma Ray: High energy EM wave.
Ionisation: Removing/adding electrons.
Activity: Decays per second.
Absorbed Dose: Energy absorbed per kilogram
Equivalent Dose: Absorbed dose × weighting factor.
Radiation Weighting Factor: Biological effect.
Background Radiation: Natural/artificial radiation.
Half-Life: Time for activity to halve.
Nuclear Fission: When 1 large nuclei splits into 2 smaller nuclei
Chain Reaction: Neutrons produce in 1 reaction go on to cause repeated fission events.
Nuclear Fusion: Two small nuclei join to form 1 large nuclei
Plasma Containment: Magnetic confinement.
